# LearingR

Bacterial cells employ a variety of transport proteins in their uptake mechanisms. These important proteins are embedded in membranes and are classified into several types. The two major types are channels and carriers. Channels, as their name indicates, are proteins that form pores in membranes through which substances can pass; they are often involved in facilitated diffusion. Channels show some specificity for the substances that pass through them, but this is considerably less than that shown by carriers, which are far more substrate specific. Carriers are so named because they carry nutrients across the membrane.

During facilitated diffusion, substances move across the plasma membrane with the assistance of transport proteins that are either channels or carriers. The rate of facilitated diffusion increases with the concentration gradient much more rapidly and at lower concentrations of the diffusing molecule than that of passive diffusion (figure 3.10). When the transporter is a carrier, the diffusion rate reaches a plateau above a specific gradient value because the carrier protein is saturated; that is, it is transporting as many solute molecules as possible. The resulting curve resembles an enzyme-substrate curve (see figure 10.17) and is different from the linear response seen with passive diffusion. An example of channel-mediated facilitated diffusion is that involving aquaporins (see figure 2.31), which transport water. Aquaporins are members of the major intrinsic protein (MIP) family of proteins. MIPs facilitate diffusion of small polar molecules, and they are observed in virtually all organisms.